Data-Oriented Design
====================

Data-oriented design has been around for decades in one form or another,
but was only officially given a name by Noel Llopis in his September
2009 article of the same name. The idea that it is a programming
paradigm is seen as contentious as many believe that it can be used side
by side with another paradigm such as object-oriented programming,
procedural programming, or functional programming. In one respect they
are right, data-oriented design can function alongside the other
paradigms, but so can they. A Lisp programmer knows that functional
programming can coexist with object-oriented programming and a C
programmer is well aware that object-oriented programming can coexist
with procedural programming. We shall ignore these comments and claim
that data-oriented design is another important tool; a tool just as
capable of coexistence as the rest.

The time was right in 2009. The hardware was ripe for a change in how to
develop. Badly programmed potentially very fast computers, hindered by a
hardware ignorant programming paradigm made many engine programmers
weep. The times have changed, and many mobile and desktop solutions now
need the data-oriented design approach less, not because the machines
are better at mitigating ineffective programming, but the games being
designed are less demanding. As we move towards ubiquity for multi-core
machines, not just the desktops, but our phones too, and towards a world
of programming for massively parallel processing design as in the
compute cores on our graphics cards and in our consoles, the need for
data-oriented design will only grow. It will grow because abstractions
and serial thinking will be the bottleneck of your competitors, and
those that embrace the data-oriented approach will thrive.
