Design Patterns
===============

Design patterns came about as a way of writing down and transferring the
knowledge gained from experience, originally in architectural design
with the term coined as Patterns by Christopher Alexander. Software
design patterns came about from experience developing object-oriented
software. The new prefixed name was used in the title of the book
*Design Patterns: elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software*
released in 1994, and has stuck ever since.

Using design patterns, it was found that the strategies and solutions to
common activities and problems could be expressed as a pattern language
of requirement and designs for structuring and the strategies for
actions taken on them. This reusable design would be too complex to
write as a templated function or a library of reusable code as it
describes a solution that would normally require interfacing with and
thinking about how it applies to your particular situation and code
base. The reason why the solution is too complex to write is not because
the problem being solved is complex in itself, but that the solution is
normally rooted in the problem domain rather than any specific
programming language. However, the solution is only complex because it
roots itself in the representation provided by the object-oriented
language that was used to bring the design, in this case the problem
domain itself, into the code in order for it to be solved. If the
problem was not represented by objects but instead left as a technical
design, then many design patterns would not be required. This is why
when people talk about software design patterns they have to reference
them as elements of reusable object-oriented design rather than elements
of reusable software engineering.

